cte-condensed.md, before:

Concise Text Encoding: Quick Description
========================================

As the [CTE specification](cte-specification.md) has become rather dense, this document is provided as a simpler description of how CTE documents are structured. Many details are glossed over, and so this document should not be considered a replacement for the [official specification](cte-specification.md).



General Layout
--------------

A CTE document begins with a version specifier, followed by whitespace, and then a top-level object.

Example: A CTE version 1 document containing the string `some_object` as the top-level object:

    c1 some_object

Example: A CTE version 1 document containing a map as the top-level object:

    c1
    {
        one = 1
        two = 2
    }


### Whitespace

Documents can generally contain whitespace anywhere (specific rules [here](cte-specification.md#whitespace)). It should be used to help keep the document clear and readable by humans. Only the following characters are allowed as whitespace:

| Code Point | Name            |
| ---------- | --------------- |
| u+0009     | horizontal tab  |
| u+000a     | line feed       |
| u+000d     | carriage return |
| u+0020     | space           |



Basic Types
-----------

### Nil

The "null" value: `@nil`


### Boolean

Boolean types can be `@true` or `@false`


### UUID

UUID types follow the standard UUID format, except they are prefixed with `@`:

    @123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426655440000


### Integer

Integers are positive or negative, and can be written in different bases:

| Base | Name        | Digits           | Prefix | Example      | Decimal Equivalent |
| ---- | ----------- | ---------------- | ------ | ------------ | ------------------ |
|   2  | Binary      | 01               | `0b`   | `-0b1100`    | -12                |
|   8  | Octal       | 01234567         | `0o`   | `0o755`      | 493                |
|  10  | Decimal     | 0123456789       |        | `900000`     | 900000             |
|  16  | Hexadecimal | 0123456789abcdef | `0h`   | `0xdeadbeef` | 3735928559         |

You can use `_` as "numeric whitespace": `1_000_000`


### Floating Point

Floating point numbers are written with a whole part, a fractional part, and possibly an exponential part. Base-10 floating point marks the exponential portion using `e`, and base-16 numbers use `p`:

| Exponent | Example        |
| -------- | -------------- |
| None     | `-105.67`      |
| Base-10  | `1.944e-28`    |
| Base-16  | `0xa.3fb8p+42` |

Floating point values can also use numeric whitespace: `-1.541_998e20`

Special floating point values:

 * `@inf`: Infinity
 * `-@inf`: Negative Infinity
 * `@nan`: Not a Number


### Date

A date contains a year, month, and day field, in that order: `2018-11-4`


### Time

A time contains an hour, minute, second, optional subsecond, and optional time zone, using a 24h clock. Subsecond values are supported down to the nanosecond.

    18:04:11
    11:59:30/America/New_York
    14:41:13.148552211/Europe/Berlin

Note: If the time zone is omitted, it is assumed to be UTC.


### Timestamp

A timestamp is a combination date and time, separated by `/`: `1985-10-26/01:20:01.105/America/Los_Angeles`


#### Time Zones

Time zones can be written as area/location, or as latitude/longitude:

| Type               | Example        |
| ------------------ | -------------- |
| Area/Location      | `Asia/Tokyo`   |
| Latitude/Longitude | `35.68/139.77` |

Time zone areas can be [abbreviated](cte-specification.md#abbreviated-areas).

Special time zones:

| Zone    | Abbreviation | Meaning                          |
| ------- | ------------ | -------------------------------- |
| `Zero`  | `Z`          | UTC                              |
| `Local` | `L`          | In the time zone of the observer |


### String

#### Unquoted String

An unquoted string begins with a non-punctuation, non-numeric letter (except that `_` is allowed), after which alphanumerics and the symbols `_`, `-`. `+`, `.`, `:`, and `/` are allowed:

    twenty-five
    Std:value.next
    _underscore+other.symbols
    飲み物/お茶

#### Quoted String

A quoted string begins with `"`, and continues until the next unescaped `"` character.

    "This is a string"

The `\` character acts as an escape character, with the following possible sequences:

| Sequence            | Interpretation                  |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| `\`, u+000a         | continuation                    |
| `\`, u+000d, u+000a | continuation                    |
| `\\`                | backslash (u+005c)              |
| `\"`                | double quote (u+0022)           |
| `\r`                | carriage return (u+000d)        |
| `\n`                | linefeed (u+000a)               |
| `\t`                | horizontal tab (u+0009)         |
| `\u0001` - `\uffff` | unicode character               |

#### Verbatim String

A verbatim string begins with a backtick `` ` ``. The next sequence of characters defines the "end sequence", and is terminated by a whitespace character (usually a space or linefeed). From that point, the string continues until that same end sequence is repeated (like here documents in Bash).

Example:

```
`ZZZ
A verbatim sequence is like a "here" document in Bash.
Everything (including newlines) is interpreted literally.
In this example, verbatim processing continues until three "Z" characters are
encountered.ZZZ
```


### URI

A URI begins with `u`, and is enclosed in double-quotes: `u"http://example.com"`


### Bytes

The bytes type is for encoding arbitrary file or memory contents.

The bytes type begins with `b`, and is hex encoded in double-quotes (with whitespace allowed):

    b"39 12 82 e1 81 39 d9 8b 39 4c 63 9d 04 8c"
    b"391282e18139d98b394c639d048c"


### Custom

The custom type is for encoding custom data types that are not natively supported by CTE.

The custom type is encoded the same way as the bytes type, except it begins with `c`:

    c"04 ff 91 aa 2e"



Container Types
---------------

### List

A list is enclosed in `[]`, and contains whitespace separated objects:

    [one 2 3.0]


### Map

A map is enclosed in `{}`, and contains whitespace separated key-value pairs. A key-value pair's key and value components are separated by the `=` character with optional whitespace. A map key must not be a container type, the `@nil` type, or a value that evaluates to NaN (not-a-number).

    {
        name = "John Smith"
        email = u"mailto:john_smith@example.com"
        age = 35
    }


### Markup

A markup container stores XML-style data, which is essentially a name, an optional map of attributes, and an optional list of contents.

Markup containers are best suited for presentation data. For regular data, maps and lists are better.

The CTE encoding of a markup container is similar to XML, except:

 * There are no end tags. All data is contained within the begin `<`, content begin `|`, and end `>` characters.
 * Comments are encoded using `/*` and `*/` instead of `<!--` and `-->`, and can be nested.
 * Entity references are initiated with `\` instead of `&`.
 * [Unquoted strings](#unquoted-string) are allowed.
 * Non-string types can be stored in a markup container.

#### Markup Structure

| Section    | Delimiter  | Type    | Required |
| ---------- | ---------- | ------- | -------- |
| Begin      | `<`        |         | Y        |
| Tag name   |            | Keyable | Y        |
| Attributes | whitespace | Map     |          |
| Contents   | `\|`       | List    |          |
| End        | `>`        |         | Y        |

The allowable types for the tag name are the same as the allowable types for [map keys](#map).

Attributes and contents are optional. There must be whitespace between the container name and the attributes section (if present).

Illustration of markup encodings (Note: `|` characters are escaped with `\` here so that they'll render properly in tables in markdown viewers; do not escape them in a real document!):

| Attributes | Children | Example                                                    |
| ---------- | -------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
|     N      |    N     | `<br>`                                                     |
|     Y      |    N     | `<div id=fillme>`                                          |
|     N      |    Y     | `<span\|Some text here>`                                   |
|     Y      |    Y     | `<ul id=mylist style=boring \| <li\|first> <li\|second> >` |

#### Markup Attributes

The markup attributes section behaves exactly like a [map](#map).

#### Markup Contents

The markup contents section behaves like a list, but can contain only strings, comments, and other markup containers. Any sequences that are not a comment or markup container are considered strings.

The following escape sequences are allowed in strings:

| Sequence            | Interpretation              |
| ------------------- | --------------------------- |
| `\*`                | asterisk (u+002a)           |
| `\/`                | slash (u+002f)              |
| `\<`                | less-than (u+003c)          |
| `\>`                | greater-than (u+003e)       |
| `\\`                | backslash (u+005c)          |
| `` \` ``            | backtick (u+0060)           |
| `\_`                | non-breaking space (u+00a0) |
| `\u0001` - `\uffff` | unicode character           |

Entity references use the same names as in XML and HTML, except that they are initiated with a backslash (`\`) rather than of an ampersand (`&`). (e.g. `\gt;` instead of `&gt;`).


#### Markup Example

```
c1
(xml-doctype=[html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" u"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd"])
<html xmlns=u"http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang=en |
    <body|
    <div id=parent style=normal ref-id=1 |
      <script| `##
        document.getElementById('parent').insertAdjacentHTML('beforeend', '<div id="idChild"> content </div>');
      ##>
        Here is some text <span style=highlighted| with highlighted text> and more text.
        <br>
        <ul|
            <li id=item_a | Item A>
            <li id=item_b | Item B>
            <li id=item_c | Item C>
        >

        /* MathML: ax^2 + bx + c */
        <mrow |
          <mi|a> <mo|\InvisibleTimes;> <msup| <mi|x> <mn|2> >
          <mo|+> <mi|b> <mo|\InvisibleTimes;> <mi|x>
          <mo|+> <mi|c>
        >
    >
  >
>
```



Pseudo-Objects
--------------

Pseudo-objects add additional metadata to another object, or to the document, or affect the interpreted structure of the document in some way. Pseudo-objects can be placed anywhere a real object can be placed, but do not themselves constitute objects. For example, `(begin-map) ("a key") (pseudo-object) (end-container)` is not valid, because the pseudo-object isn't a real object, and therefore doesn't count as an actual map value for key "a key".

#### Referring Pseudo-objects

"Referring" pseudo-objects refer to the next object following at the current container level. This will either be a real object, or a visible pseudo-object

#### Invisible Pseudo-objects

Invsible pseudo-objects are effectively invisible to referring pseudo-objects, and are skipped over when searching for the object that is being referred to.


### Marker

A marker is a referring, invisible pseudo-object that tags the next object with a [tag name](#tag-name), such that it can be referenced from another part of the document (or from a different document).

A marker begins with the marker initiator (`&`), followed immediately by a [tag name](#tag-name), followed by the object being marked.

Example:

    [
        &big_string "Pretend that this is a huge string"
        &1 {a = 1}
    ]

#### Tag Name

A tag name is a unique (to the document) identifier for marked objects. A tag name can be either a positive integer or an [unquoted string](#unquoted-string).


### Reference

A reference is a stand-in for an object that has been [marked](#marker) elsewhere in this or another document. This can be useful for repeating or cyclic data. Unlike other pseudo-objects, references can be used just like regular objects (for example, `(begin-map) ("a key") (reference) (end-container)` is valid).

A reference begins with the reference initiator (`#`), followed immediately by either a [tag name](#tag-name) or a [URI](#uri).

Rules:

 * A reference with a [tag name](#tag-name) must refer to another object previously declared in the same document (local reference).
 * Forward references within a document are not allowed (all referenced tags must be declared earlier in the document).
 * Recursive references are allowed.
 * A reference with a URI must point to:
   - Another CBE or CTE document (using no fragment section, thus referring to the entire document)
   - A tag name inside another CBE or CTE document, using the fragment section of the URI as a tag identifier

Example:

    {
        some_object = {
            my_string = &big_string "Pretend that this is a huge string"
            my_map = &1 {
                a = 1
            }
        }

        reference_to_string = #big_string
        reference_to_map = #1
        reference_to_local_doc = #u"common.cte"
        reference_to_remote_doc = #u"https://somewhere.com/my_document.cbe?format=long"
        reference_to_local_doc_marker = #u"common.cte#legalese"
        reference_to_remote_doc_marker = #u"https://somewhere.com/my_document.cbe?format=long#examples"
    }


### Metadata Map

A metadata map is a referring pseudo-object that associates keyed values with the next object:

```
c1
// Metadata for the entire document
(
    _ct = 2017.01.14-15:22:41/Z
    _mt = 2019.08.17-12:44:31/Z
    _at = 2019.09.14-09:55:00/Z
)
{
    records = [
        // Metadata for "ABC Corp" record
        (
            _ct = 2019.05.14-10:22:55/Z
            _t = [longtime_client big_purchases]
        )
        {
            client = "ABC Corp"
            amount = 10499.28
            due = 2020.05.14
        }
    ]
}
```


### Comment

Comments are written C-style:

* Single line: `// A comment`
* Multiline: `/* A comment */`

Multiline comments can be nested: `/* /* */ */`



Combined Example
----------------

```
c1
// _ct is the creation time, in this case referring to the entire document
(_ct = 2019-9-1/22:14:01)
{
    /* Comments look very C-like, except:
       /* Nested comments are allowed! */
    */
    // Notice that there are no commas in maps and lists
    (metadata_about_a_list = "something interesting about a_list")
    a_list           = [1 2 "a string"]
    map              = {2=two 3=3000 1=one}
    string           = "A string value"
    boolean          = @true
    "binary int"     = -0b10001011
    "octal int"      = 0o644
    "regular int"    = -10000000
    "hex int"        = 0xfffe0001
    "decimal float"  = -14.125
    "hex float"      = 0x5.1ec4p20
    uuid             = @f1ce4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426655440000
    date             = 2019-7-1
    time             = 18:04:00.940231541/E/Prague
    timestamp        = 2010-7-15/13:28:15.415942344/Z
    nil              = @nil
    bytes            = b"10ff389add004f4f91"
    url              = u"https://example.com/"
    email            = u"mailto:me@somewhere.com"
    1.5              = "Keys don't have to be strings"
    long-string      = `ZZZ
A backtick induces verbatim processing, which in this case will continue
until three Z characters are encountered, similar to how here documents in
bash work.
You can put anything in here, including double-quote ("), or even more
backticks (`). Verbatim processing stops at the end sequence, which in this
case is three Z characters, specified earlier as a sentinel.ZZZ
    marked_object    = &tag1 {
                                description = "This map will be referenced later using #tag1"
                                value = -@inf
                                child_elements = @nil
                                recursive = #tag1
                            }
    ref1             = #tag1
    ref2             = #tag1
    outside_ref      = #u"https://somewhere.else.com/path/to/document.cte#some_tag"
    // The markup type is good for presentation data
    html_compatible  = (xml-doctype=[html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" u"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd"])
                       <html xmlns=u"http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang=en |
                         <body|
                           Please choose from the following widgets:
                           <div id=parent style=normal ref-id=1 |
                             /* Here we use a backtick to induce verbatim processing.
                                In this case, "##" is chosen as the ending sequence */
                             <script| `##
                               document.getElementById('parent').insertAdjacentHTML('beforeend', '<div id="idChild"> content </div>');
                             ##>
                           >
                         >
                       >
}
```



License
-------

Copyright (c) 2018 Karl Stenerud. All rights reserved.

Distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode
License deed: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

Commit message:

Renamed tag name to marker ID to avoid confusion between marker and markup terminology. Allowed forward references for markers/references. Restricted integer marker IDs to 64 bits. Added context metadata type.

cte-condensed.md, after:

Concise Text Encoding: Quick Description
========================================

As the [CTE specification](cte-specification.md) has become rather dense, this document is provided as a simpler description of how CTE documents are structured. Many details are glossed over, and so this document should not be considered a replacement for the [official specification](cte-specification.md).



General Layout
--------------

A CTE document begins with a version specifier, followed by whitespace, and then a top-level object.

Example: A CTE version 1 document containing the string `some_object` as the top-level object:

    c1 some_object

Example: A CTE version 1 document containing a map as the top-level object:

    c1
    {
        one = 1
        two = 2
    }


### Whitespace

Documents can generally contain whitespace anywhere (specific rules [here](cte-specification.md#whitespace)). It should be used to help keep the document clear and readable by humans. Only the following characters are allowed as whitespace:

| Code Point | Name            |
| ---------- | --------------- |
| u+0009     | horizontal tab  |
| u+000a     | line feed       |
| u+000d     | carriage return |
| u+0020     | space           |



Basic Types
-----------

### Nil

The "null" value: `@nil`


### Boolean

Boolean types can be `@true` or `@false`


### UUID

UUID types follow the standard UUID format, except they are prefixed with `@`:

    @123e4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426655440000


### Integer

Integers are positive or negative, and can be written in different bases:

| Base | Name        | Digits           | Prefix | Example      | Decimal Equivalent |
| ---- | ----------- | ---------------- | ------ | ------------ | ------------------ |
|   2  | Binary      | 01               | `0b`   | `-0b1100`    | -12                |
|   8  | Octal       | 01234567         | `0o`   | `0o755`      | 493                |
|  10  | Decimal     | 0123456789       |        | `900000`     | 900000             |
|  16  | Hexadecimal | 0123456789abcdef | `0x`   | `0xdeadbeef` | 3735928559         |

You can use `_` as "numeric whitespace": `1_000_000`


### Floating Point

Floating point numbers are written with a whole part, a fractional part, and possibly an exponential part. Base-10 floating point marks the exponential portion using `e`, and base-16 numbers use `p`:

| Exponent | Example        |
| -------- | -------------- |
| None     | `-105.67`      |
| Base-10  | `1.944e-28`    |
| Base-16  | `0xa.3fb8p+42` |

Floating point values can also use numeric whitespace: `-1.541_998e20`

Special floating point values:

 * `@inf`: Infinity
 * `-@inf`: Negative Infinity
 * `@nan`: Not a Number


### Date

A date contains a year, month, and day field, in that order: `2018-11-4`


### Time

A time contains an hour, minute, second, optional subsecond, and optional time zone, using a 24h clock. Subsecond values are supported down to the nanosecond.

    18:04:11
    11:59:30/America/New_York
    14:41:13.148552211/Europe/Berlin

Note: If the time zone is omitted, it is assumed to be UTC.


### Timestamp

A timestamp is a combination date and time, separated by `/`: `1985-10-26/01:20:01.105/America/Los_Angeles`


#### Time Zones

Time zones can be written as area/location, or as latitude/longitude:

| Type               | Example        |
| ------------------ | -------------- |
| Area/Location      | `Asia/Tokyo`   |
| Latitude/Longitude | `35.68/139.77` |

Time zone areas can be [abbreviated](cte-specification.md#abbreviated-areas).

Special time zones:

| Zone    | Abbreviation | Meaning                          |
| ------- | ------------ | -------------------------------- |
| `Zero`  | `Z`          | UTC                              |
| `Local` | `L`          | In the time zone of the observer |


### String

#### Unquoted String

An unquoted string begins with a non-punctuation, non-numeric letter (except that `_` is allowed), after which alphanumerics and the symbols `_`, `-`. `+`, `.`, `:`, and `/` are allowed:

    twenty-five
    Std:value.next
    _underscore+other.symbols
    飲み物/お茶

#### Quoted String

A quoted string begins with `"`, and continues until the next unescaped `"` character.

    "This is a string"

The `\` character acts as an escape character, with the following possible sequences:

| Sequence            | Interpretation                  |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| `\`, u+000a         | continuation                    |
| `\`, u+000d, u+000a | continuation                    |
| `\\`                | backslash (u+005c)              |
| `\"`                | double quote (u+0022)           |
| `\r`                | carriage return (u+000d)        |
| `\n`                | linefeed (u+000a)               |
| `\t`                | horizontal tab (u+0009)         |
| `\u0001` - `\uffff` | unicode character               |

#### Verbatim String

A verbatim string begins with a backtick `` ` ``. The next sequence of characters defines the "end sequence", and is terminated by a whitespace character (usually a space or linefeed). From that point, the string continues until that same end sequence is repeated (like here documents in Bash).

Example:

```
`ZZZ
A verbatim sequence is like a "here" document in Bash.
Everything (including newlines) is interpreted literally.
In this example, verbatim processing continues until three "Z" characters are
encountered.ZZZ
```


### URI

A URI begins with `u`, and is enclosed in double-quotes: `u"http://example.com"`


### Bytes

The bytes type is for encoding arbitrary file or memory contents.

The bytes type begins with `b`, and is hex encoded in double-quotes (with whitespace allowed):

    b"39 12 82 e1 81 39 d9 8b 39 4c 63 9d 04 8c"
    b"391282e18139d98b394c639d048c"


### Custom

The custom type is for encoding custom data types that are not natively supported by CTE.

The custom type is encoded the same way as the bytes type, except it begins with `c`:

    c"04 ff 91 aa 2e"



Container Types
---------------

### List

A list is enclosed in `[]`, and contains whitespace separated objects:

    [one 2 3.0]


### Map

A map is enclosed in `{}`, and contains whitespace separated key-value pairs. A key-value pair's key and value components are separated by the `=` character with optional whitespace. A map key must not be a container type, the `@nil` type, or a value that evaluates to NaN (not-a-number).

    {
        name = "John Smith"
        email = u"mailto:john_smith@example.com"
        age = 35
    }


### Markup

A markup container stores XML-style data, which is essentially a name, an optional map of attributes, and an optional list of contents.

Markup containers are best suited for presentation data. For regular data, maps and lists are better.

The CTE encoding of a markup container is similar to XML, except:

 * There are no end tags. All data is contained within the begin `<`, content begin `|`, and end `>` characters.
 * Comments are encoded using `/*` and `*/` instead of `<!--` and `-->`, and can be nested.
 * Entity references are initiated with `\` instead of `&`.
 * [Unquoted strings](#unquoted-string) are allowed.
 * Non-string types can be stored in a markup container.

#### Markup Structure

| Section    | Delimiter  | Type    | Required |
| ---------- | ---------- | ------- | -------- |
| Begin      | `<`        |         | Y        |
| Tag name   |            | Keyable | Y        |
| Attributes | whitespace | Map     |          |
| Contents   | `\|`       | List    |          |
| End        | `>`        |         | Y        |

The allowable types for the tag name are the same as the allowable types for [map keys](#map).

Attributes and contents are optional. There must be whitespace between the container name and the attributes section (if present).

Illustration of markup encodings (Note: `|` characters are escaped with `\` here so that they'll render properly in tables in markdown viewers; do not escape them in a real document!):

| Attributes | Children | Example                                                    |
| ---------- | -------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
|     N      |    N     | `<br>`                                                     |
|     Y      |    N     | `<div id=fillme>`                                          |
|     N      |    Y     | `<span\|Some text here>`                                   |
|     Y      |    Y     | `<ul id=mylist style=boring \| <li\|first> <li\|second> >` |

#### Markup Attributes

The markup attributes section behaves exactly like a [map](#map).

#### Markup Contents

The markup contents section behaves like a list, but can contain only strings, comments, and other markup containers. Any sequences that are not a comment or markup container are considered strings.

The following escape sequences are allowed in strings:

| Sequence            | Interpretation              |
| ------------------- | --------------------------- |
| `\*`                | asterisk (u+002a)           |
| `\/`                | slash (u+002f)              |
| `\<`                | less-than (u+003c)          |
| `\>`                | greater-than (u+003e)       |
| `\\`                | backslash (u+005c)          |
| `` \` ``            | backtick (u+0060)           |
| `\_`                | non-breaking space (u+00a0) |
| `\u0001` - `\uffff` | unicode character           |

Entity references use the same names as in XML and HTML, except that they are initiated with a backslash (`\`) rather than of an ampersand (`&`). (e.g. `\gt;` instead of `&gt;`).


#### Markup Example

```
c1
(xml-doctype=[html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" u"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd"])
<html xmlns=u"http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang=en |
    <body|
    <div id=parent style=normal ref-id=1 |
      <script| `##
        document.getElementById('parent').insertAdjacentHTML('beforeend', '<div id="idChild"> content </div>');
      ##>
        Here is some text <span style=highlighted| with highlighted text> and more text.
        <br>
        <ul|
            <li id=item_a | Item A>
            <li id=item_b | Item B>
            <li id=item_c | Item C>
        >

        /* MathML: ax^2 + bx + c */
        <mrow |
          <mi|a> <mo|\InvisibleTimes;> <msup| <mi|x> <mn|2> >
          <mo|+> <mi|b> <mo|\InvisibleTimes;> <mi|x>
          <mo|+> <mi|c>
        >
    >
  >
>
```



Pseudo-Objects
--------------

Pseudo-objects add additional metadata to another object, or to the document, or affect the interpreted structure of the document in some way. Pseudo-objects can be placed anywhere a real object can be placed, but do not themselves constitute objects. For example, `(begin-map) ("a key") (pseudo-object) (end-container)` is not valid, because the pseudo-object isn't a real object, and therefore doesn't count as an actual map value for key "a key".

#### Referring Pseudo-objects

_Referring_ pseudo-objects refer to the next object following at the current container level. This will either be a real object, or a visible pseudo-object

#### Invisible Pseudo-objects

_Invsible_ pseudo-objects are effectively invisible to referring pseudo-objects, and are skipped over when searching for the object that is being referred to.


### Marker

A marker is a _referring_, _invisible_ pseudo-object that tags the next object with a [marker ID](#marker-id), such that it can be referenced from another part of the document (or from a different document).

A marker begins with the marker initiator (`&`), followed immediately by a [marker ID](#marker-id), followed by the object being marked.

Example:

    [
        &big_string "Pretend that this is a huge string"
        &1 {a = 1}
    ]

#### Marker ID

A marker ID is a unique (to the document) identifier for marked objects. A marker ID can be either a positive integer or an [unquoted string](#unquoted-string).


### Reference

A reference is a _non-referring_, _visible_ pseudo-object that acts as a stand-in for an object that has been [marked](#marker) elsewhere in this or another document. This can be useful for repeating or cyclic data. Unlike other pseudo-objects, references can be used just like regular objects (for example, `(begin-map) ("a key") (reference) (end-container)` is valid).

A reference begins with the reference initiator (`#`), followed immediately by either a [marker ID](#marker-id) or a [URI](#uri).

Example:

    {
        some_object = {
            my_string = &big_string "Pretend that this is a huge string"
            my_map = &1 {
                a = 1
            }
        }

        reference_to_string = #big_string
        reference_to_map = #1
        reference_to_local_doc = #u"common.cte"
        reference_to_remote_doc = #u"https://somewhere.com/my_document.cbe?format=long"
        reference_to_local_doc_marker = #u"common.cte#legalese"
        reference_to_remote_doc_marker = #u"https://somewhere.com/my_document.cbe?format=long#examples"
    }


### Metadata Map

A metadata map is a _referring_, _visible_ pseudo-object containing keyed values which are to be associated with the object following the metadata map.

```
c1
// Metadata for the entire document
(
    _ct = 2017.01.14-15:22:41/Z
    _mt = 2019.08.17-12:44:31/Z
    _at = 2019.09.14-09:55:00/Z
)
{
    records = [
        // Metadata for "ABC Corp" record
        (
            _ct = 2019.05.14-10:22:55/Z
            _t = [longtime_client big_purchases]
        )
        {
            client = "ABC Corp"
            amount = 10499.28
            due = 2020.05.14
        }
    ]
}
```


### Comment

A comment is a _non-referring_, _invisible_, list-style pseudo-object that can only contain strings or other comment containers (to support nested comments).

Comments are written C-style:

* Single line: `// A comment`
* Multiline: `/* A comment */`

Comments can be nested: `/* /* */ */`



Combined Example
----------------

```
c1
// _ct is the creation time, in this case referring to the entire document
(_ct = 2019-9-1/22:14:01)
{
    /* Comments look very C-like, except:
       /* Nested comments are allowed! */
    */
    // Notice that there are no commas in maps and lists
    (metadata_about_a_list = "something interesting about a_list")
    a_list           = [1 2 "a string"]
    map              = {2=two 3=3000 1=one}
    string           = "A string value"
    boolean          = @true
    "binary int"     = -0b10001011
    "octal int"      = 0o644
    "regular int"    = -10000000
    "hex int"        = 0xfffe0001
    "decimal float"  = -14.125
    "hex float"      = 0x5.1ec4p20
    uuid             = @f1ce4567-e89b-12d3-a456-426655440000
    date             = 2019-7-1
    time             = 18:04:00.940231541/E/Prague
    timestamp        = 2010-7-15/13:28:15.415942344/Z
    nil              = @nil
    bytes            = b"10ff389add004f4f91"
    url              = u"https://example.com/"
    email            = u"mailto:me@somewhere.com"
    1.5              = "Keys don't have to be strings"
    long-string      = `ZZZ
A backtick induces verbatim processing, which in this case will continue
until three Z characters are encountered, similar to how here documents in
bash work.
You can put anything in here, including double-quote ("), or even more
backticks (`). Verbatim processing stops at the end sequence, which in this
case is three Z characters, specified earlier as a sentinel.ZZZ
    marked_object    = &id1 {
                                description = "This map will be referenced later using #id1"
                                value = -@inf
                                child_elements = @nil
                                recursive = #id1
                            }
    ref1             = #id1
    ref2             = #id1
    outside_ref      = #u"https://somewhere.else.com/path/to/document.cte#some_id"
    // The markup type is good for presentation data
    html_compatible  = (xml-doctype=[html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" u"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd"])
                       <html xmlns=u"http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang=en |
                         <body|
                           Please choose from the following widgets:
                           <div id=parent style=normal ref-id=1 |
                             /* Here we use a backtick to induce verbatim processing.
                                In this case, "##" is chosen as the ending sequence */
                             <script| `##
                               document.getElementById('parent').insertAdjacentHTML('beforeend', '<div id="idChild"> content </div>');
                             ##>
                           >
                         >
                       >
}
```



License
-------

Copyright (c) 2018 Karl Stenerud. All rights reserved.

Distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode
License deed: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
